>> Murray Jason: Good morning and welcome to the
third of 3 talks focusing on Audio here at WWDC 10.
My name is Murray Jason.
I am on the Developer Publications Team at Apple.
And you folks are here today because your
applications have the most demanding audio needs.
To satisfy those needs, you want to go
to the lowest layer of our audio stack.
I'm here to help with that.
So today I'll talk about 3 main things.
First, I'll put Audio Units in context.
There may be some of you who are not
entirely clear on when to use Audio Units,
when to use one of our other audio
technologies, so I'll try to answer that for you.
Second, we'll take a quick look at the audio
architecture of an iPhone app that uses audio units
and that will give us a conceptual grounding
for looking at the code for building one.
I'll spend most of my time today showing you how
to build 2 different types of audio unit apps.
Now, these are simple prototype apps that I designed
to illustrate some important design principles
and coding patterns that you can
use in your own applications.
So, let's begin at the beginning and define audio units.
An audio unit is an audio processing plug-in.
It's the one type of audio plug-in available in iPhone OS.
And the Audio Unit framework is the architecture,
the one architecture for audio plug-ins.
One of its key features is that it provides
a flexible processing change facility
that lets you string together audio units
in creative ways so you can do things
that a single audio unit could not do on its own.
One of the key value adds over
our other audio technologies is
that Audio Units support real-time
input, output and simultaneous I/O.
Being a low level API, they demand an informed
approach so you're in the right place.
So, here's our audio stack.
All audio technologies in iOS are
built on top of audio units
so you're using them whether or
not you're using them directly.
Most mobile application audio needs are
handled extremely well by the Objective-C layer
of the stack, Media Player and AV Foundation.
And if you were here for the earlier talks
today, you heard quite a bit about these.
The Media Player framework gives you
access to the user's iPod Library
and the AV Foundation framework provides a flexible and
powerful set of classes for playing and recording audio.
And in iOS 4, it adds about 4 dozen
or so new classes focused on video
but with a lot of very interesting audio capabilities.
Now if you're doing a game and want to provide an immersive
3D sound environment, you'll use one of our C APIs, OpenAL.
And if you want to work with audio
samples or do more advanced work,
you can use one of the very powerful
opaque types in Audio Toolbox.
The Audio Queue API which we've heard about
a little bit earlier connects to input
or output hardware and gives you access to samples.
Audio Converter let's you convert
to and from various formats.
And Extended Audio File let's you write to and from disk.
It's when you want to do more advanced work that you
don't want and don't want anything in between you
and the audio units that you use them directly.
So, with Audio Units, like I mentioned, you can
perform simultaneous I/O with very low latency.
If you're doing a synthetic musical
instrument or an interactive musical game
where responsiveness is very important, you can
use audio units as well and the third scenario
where you'd pick them is if you want one
of their built-in features such as mixing
or echo cancellation as Eric talked about.
iOS gives you 4 sets of audio units listed here.
We group them into effects, mixers,
I/O and format converters.
Currently, in iOS, we provide 1 effect
unit and that's the iPod Equalizer.
It's the same audio units that the iPod app itself uses.
We provide 2 mixers that we also heard
about earlier if you were here this morning.
The 3D Mixer is the audio unit upon which OpenAL is built.
The Multichannel Mixer lets you combine any number of
mono or stereo streams into a single stereo output.
There are 3 I/O units.
The Remote I/O connects to input and output audio
hardware and provides format conversion for you.
The Voice Processing I/O adds to
that acoustic echo cancellation.
The Generic Output is a little bit different.
It sends its output back to your application and all
of these I/O units make use of the Format Converter.
The converter itself lets you convert
to and from linear PCM.
Today I'm going to focus on these two.
These are probably the most commonly used audio
units, I'll also say something about the equalizer.
If most mobile application audio needs are handled well by
the Objective-C layer, where do we want to use audio units?
Well, in a VoIP app, Voice over Internet
Protocol, you use our voice processing I/O unit.
It is purpose built for that and it keeps getting better.
In an interactive music app, for example, you may be
providing drum sounds and one or more melodic instruments
and want to mix them together to a
stereo output, you'd use a mixer unit.
For real-time audio I/O processing such as an app where
the users talks into the device and the voice comes
out sounding different, you use a Remote I/O.
So, that's a quick overview.
Now, let's look at the architecture
of an app that uses audio units.
In this part of my talk, we'll begin with a demo
of a "hello world" style app using an I/O unit.
And then we'll look at the design of that app
starting with a black box and moving quickly
through a functional description and
then the API pieces that make it work.
So, I'd now like to invite up on to stage, Bill Stewart
from the Core Audio Engineering Team
to show us the I/O host example.
>> Bill Stewart: So, what I'm going to
show today is the first of 2 examples.
I'll come back later and show you the second one and
then Murray's going to go through and look at the code
that we have in order to write this audio unit.
And what the program does is that
it's going to take a microphone input
through this connector here which has a mic built in to it.
Take it through the phone and then we're going to use a
mixer unit and we're not really using the mixer unit to mix
because there's only one source here but we're going to use
a service on the mixer unit to pan the mono input from left
to right and then we'll go out and
you'll hear the sound coming out.
So, what I'm going to do now is launch
application and if I could have my mic turned off.
So, here is me talking through the phone
with the feedback which is just great.
And as you can see I have a pan control here and if I
pan this to the left of my finger works, here we go,
then you'll hear my voice coming out the left speaker.
Alternatively, if I go to right you'll hear my
voice coming out of the right speaker of course.
[Whispering] Well, see, that's
got nothing to do with audio, so.
[ Applause ]
There you go.
And then back into the middle.
So, we'll get Murray to come back and we'll go through
the how to build this application and it's a good way
to get yourself started with Audio Units.
>> Murray Jason: Thanks, Bill.
So, a black box sketch of what you
just saw looks something like this.
Audio comes in from the microphone and goes out to output
hardware and in between, it goes through a stereo panner.
So, what would a functional representation of this be?
For the panner, we need something to perform the panning.
We need something to handle input and
we need something to handle output.
We also need or could at least use the help of an
object to let us manage and coordinate these 3 objects.
So, as Bill mentioned, the panning feature
is handled by the Multichannel Mixer unit.
The coordination feature that we need
is going to be handled by an opaque type
from the Audio Toolbox layer called an AU
Graph and we call it an audio processing graph.
So, what about input and output?
Input and output have a special responsibility of
connecting to the input and output audio hardware.
Whatever the user has selected for input, whatever they've
selected for output and conveying that to your application.
Well, it turns out that the input and
output roles are handled by 2 parts
of one object and that one object is the I/O Unit.
The input element of the I/O Unit connects to input audio
hardware and sends it to your application, likewise,
the output element takes audio from your
application and conveys it to the output hardware.
So, before we get into the code, let's make
sure we're clear on just a few definitions.
An audio unit as I've mentioned is an audio
processing plug-in that you find it at runtime.
An audio unit node, now that's a term
that I haven't mentioned yet today,
is an object that represents an audio unit
in the context of an audio processing graph.
And the graph itself is the object
that manages the network of nodes.
Now we'll look at the steps you take
to create the app that you just saw.
We're going to use this checklist.
It's a little bit long but we can refer
back to it to keep track of where we are.
Let's just get into it.
The first step in building this application is the same
as the first step in just about any audio application
and that is to configure the audio
session, going through step by step.
First we're going to declare the sample
rate that we want the hardware to use.
This is because we want to have some
command over the audio quality in our app
and we also want to avoid sample rate conversion.
Sample rate conversion is quite CPU-intensive
especially if you're going for a high audio quality.
So, we've just declared the value then we get
hold of a pointer to the audio session object
and we use that in the rest of the calls.
Here we call the setPreferredHardwareSampleRate
instance method
of the audio session to let it know what we would like.
The system may or may not be able to comply with
our request depending on what else is going on.
We also set a category.
This is a simultaneous I/O app so we
need the play and record category.
We then asked the session to activate.
At this point, it grants our request
for the sample rate if it can.
In either case we ask the audio session object what the
actual hardware sample rate is after activation and we stash
that away in an instance variable
so we can use it throughout our app.
The next step is to specify the audio units that you want
from the system because remember your application's running
but the audio units are not acquired yet.
To do that, you make use of a struct
called AudioComponentDescription.
You fill its fields with 3 codes and together these 3
codes uniquely identify the audio unit that you want.
For the I/O unit, we're going to use output
as the type, Remote I/O as the subtype
and all iPhone OS audio units are manufactured by Apple.
On the Desktop, the story is somewhat different
where third party audio units are available as well.
We do the same thing for our mixer unit.
Declare the struct and then fill
its fields, mixer for the type,
multichannel mixer for the subtype
and again Apple as the manufacturer.
Now, we're ready to create the graph.
Do that by declaring the graph and then instantiating it
by calling NewAUGraph, declare a couple of AU node types
for the audio unit nodes and then the second parameter
in this call, the AUGraphAddNode call is a pointer
to the description that you saw on the previous slide.
This is our request to the system to
give us pointers to the audio units.
Next, we're going to instantiate the audio units because we
can't work with them until we have real instances of them.
Calling AUGraphOpen instantiates both the
graph and the audio units it contains.
We then declare 2 audio unit types.
One for the Remote I/O, one for the Multichannel
Mixer and then call AUGraphNodeInfo which is a call
that lets us get pointers to our
instances of the I/O unit and the mixer.
So, that was quite a lot of code.
This is where we are.
We've configured the audio session.
In particular, we've established
the sample rate we're going to use.
We specified the audio units we want and then
obtained references to instances of them.
So, now we're ready to configure the audio
units and configuring means customizing them
for the particular use we want in the app.
To configure audio units, you need to
know about a particular characteristic
of audio units and that is the audio unit property.
An audio unit property is a key-value pair
and typically it does not change over time.
Properties that you'll run into a lot when
working with audio units are stream format,
the connection from one audio unit to another.
And on a mixer unit, the number of it's input busses.
In general, not always but in general, the time to set
properties is when an audio unit is not initialized,
that means not in the state to play sound.
A property key is a globally unique constant.
A property value is a designated type.
It can be just about anything with a particular read-write
access and a target scope or scopes, and by scope,
I mean the part of the audio unit that it applies to.
For example, here is the set input call back
properties description as you see it in our docs.
And all of the properties are described
in, Audio Unit Properties Reference.
So, now I want to focus on one particular property
and that is the property of stream formats.
When you're working with audio at the individual sample
level, you need to do more than just specify the data type.
A data type is not expressive enough to describe
what an audio sample value is and if you're here
for the previous talk, you saw quite a
bit of information about why that's true.
So, when working with audio units, you
need to be aware of some key things.
The hardware itself has stream formats and it imposes those
stream formats on the outward facing sides of the I/O unit.
You'll see a picture of that in a second.
Your application specifies the stream format for itself.
The stream format you're going to use and the I/O
units are capable of converting between those two.
As James mentioned, you use the AudioStreamBasicDescription
to specify a stream format and it's a mouthful
so we often call it, usually call it ASBD.
And they're so ubiquitous, these structs, in the use of Core
Audio and in your work with audio units that it behooves you
to become familiar with them and
even comfortable with using them.
We have some resources for you there.
First, you can take a look at Core Audio Data Types
Reference which describes all the fields of the struct.
You can download and play with our
sample code that uses the ASBDs.
And in particular, I recommend that you take a look at
a file that's included in your Xcode Tools Installation
at this path, the CAStreamBasicDescription file.
Now, this is a C++ file but it defines the gold
standard on the correct way to use an ASBD.
So, let's look at where this happens in the app.
As I mentioned the hardware imposes stream formats.
The audio input hardware imposes a format on the
incoming side of the input element of the I/O unit.
Likewise, the output audio hardware imposes its
stream format on the output of the output element.
Now your application has some responsibilities as well.
You specify a stream format on the application
side of the input element of the I/O unit
and also wherever else is needed
and that's application dependent.
In this case, we need to set it on the output of the mixer.
So, this is the code you use to fill in the
fields of an audio stream basic description.
You begin by specifying the data type
you'll use to represent each sample.
The recommended type to use when working
with audio units is audio unit sample type.
This is a defined type that's a cross platform
type on iOS devices that uses 8.24 format.
On the Desktop it uses 32-bit float.
And here we simply count the number of bytes in that sample,
in that data type because we'll need
that to fill in the fields later.
Second step is to declare your struct and to
explicitly initialize all its fields to zero.
Now this is an important step and it ensures
that none of the fields contain garbage data,
because if they contain garbage data then
the results will probably not be very happy.
Then now we start filling in the struct.
The first field that we fill in is the
FormatID and we're using linear PCM and why,
because audio units use uncompressed
audio so linear PCM is the format to use.
Next in the flags field, we refine that
format by setting a flag or set of flags.
But what the flags do is specify the
particular layout of the bits in the sample.
The choices that you need to make when filling
out an ASBD are is this integer or floating point,
is this interleave data, non-interleave
data, is it big-endian or little-endian.
So if you had to do that manually, it will be a
complicated process but in practice it's as simple
as using this one meta flag AudioUnitCanonical
and it takes care of the work for you.
The next 4 fields in the struct specify the organization
and meaning of the content of an individual value.
These are the BytesPerPacket, BytesPerFrame,
FramesPerPacket and BitsPerChannel.
For more detail you can look at our docs.
If you're using mono audio which we are in this
example, you set the ChannelsPerFrame to 1,
for stereo audio you set it to 2 and so on.
And then finally, you specify a SampleRate for the stream.
And we're using the graphSampleRate which is the variable
that's holding the hardware sample rate we obtained early
on when setting up the audio session.
Now we can configure the I/O unit by applying this format.
We're going to use the InputElement of the audio unit,
the one that connects to the audio input
hardware and that is element number 1.
And a convenient mnemonic for that is to notice
that the letter I of the word input looks sort
of like a 1 then we call AudioUnitSetProperty.
This is the function you use to
set any property on any audio unit.
We have the key and value highlighted
here, we're using the--
we're applying the StreamFormat
property and using the inputStreamFormat
that you saw defined on the previous slide.
There's one more configuration we
need to do on the I/O unit and that is
because by default I/O units have their
output enabled but their input disabled.
We're doing simultaneous I/O so we need to enable input.
Set a variable to a nonzero value and apply
it to the EnableIO property like this.
Now we're ready to configure the mixer unit.
We're only using one input bus because
we're not mixing multiple sounds together.
We're just taking the sound from the microphone.
So we specify the value of one and apply it
to the ElementCount property of the mixer.
The second thing that we need to do for the
Multichannel Mixer is to set its output stream format.
Now it turns out that the Multichannel
Mixer is preconfigured to use stereo output.
All we really need to do is set the sample rate.
So this is a bit of a convenience property by calling
AudioUnitSetProperty and specifying sample rate,
we can apply the same sample rate that
we got from hardware and this ensures
that the mixer has the same sample rate on input and output.
That's very important because mixers
do not perform sample rate conversion.
So the audio units are configured and the
next step is to connect them together.
First, we need to connect the input side
of the I/O unit to the input of the mixer.
We call AUGraphConnectNodeInput.
And the semantic here is source to destination.
The numbers indicate the bus number of the audio unit.
So we're connecting element 1 or bus 1, those are synonyms
of the I/O node, that's the input part of the I/O unit
to the input of the mixer with this call.
Likewise, we call AUGraphConnectNodeInput again to connect
the output of the mixer to the output part of the I/O unit.
Well, that's most of the code.
All that's left is to provide the
user interface and to initialize
and then start the processing graph
which starts audio moving.
To provide the user interface we need one more--
we need to understand one more characteristic of
audio units and that is the Audio Unit Parameter.
So parameters like properties are key-value pairs but unlike
properties they're intended to be varied during processing.
Parameters that you'll run into a lot and some of which
we'll use today are volume, muting, stereo panning position,
and that way it works is that you create a user
interface to let the user control the parameters
and then connect that user interface to the audio unit.
A parameter key is an identifier
that is defined by the audio unit.
The parameter value is always of
the same type, it's 32-bit float.
And it's up to the audio unit to define the
meaning and permissible range for that value.
Here's an example of what our documentation
looks like for a parameter
and all of the parameters are described
in Audio Unit Parameters Reference.
So let's build a user interface.
We'll use a UI slider object from UIKit which is
a natural choice for doing something like panning.
Here you see one with some labels around it.
And we're going to apply the value of the slider thumb
position to the pan parameter of the Multichannel Mixer.
I will just mention that this parameter, this pan parameter
for the Multichannel Mixer is a new feature of iOS 4.
We'll save the value of the thumb into
a variable to apply to the audio unit.
We'll call it here new pan position.
And set it like this using the
AudioUnitSetParameter function call.
Again it's a key-value semantic,
same way as with properties.
Now to convey the position of a UI widget
on the screen into this C function,
we wrap it in an IB action method like this.
And that's all there is to creating a user
interface for an audio unit parameter.
Next we initialize the graph and what that does is check
all of the connections and formats that you specified.
Make sure that they're all valid.
It conveys formats from source to destination in
some cases and if everything returns without error,
you can start the audio processing
graph and audio starts moving.
Sometime later you can-- when you're done with your
audio you can call AUGraphStop and audio stops.
And that is most of the audio code that
you use to create the sample you saw.
To see all of it, you can download it.
It's available at the attendee site linked
from the detailed description for the session.
Next we're going to look at a rather
different sort of audio unit application.
And that is one that does not take audio from the microphone
but instead uses audio that the application generates.
In this part of the talk, we'll again start with a demo
to see what we're aiming at and what this is about.
We'll look at the architecture and then
we'll show you the code how to build it.
So again, I would like to invite up on to
stage Bill Stewart from Core Audio Engineering.
>> Bill Stewart: So I'm going to just launch this app.
So what I'm going to show you here is the
application Murray will step through in a moment.
What we're doing is sort of simulating a synthesizer so
if you've all seen a bunch of apps that are available
that do synthesis, this is something like
the way that these apps are constructed.
Now in this case we're going to
have 2 separate sources of sound.
We're going to have a guitar sound and a beat sound.
We don't provide in the example a guitar
synthesizer or drum machine or anything.
So what we're doing is just using a very small file.
We just read the file back into a buffer and that's a kind
of place holder for where your synthesizer code would be.
So if I can just, [background music]
let's just start this playing.
So I've got a global volume which
controls the volume of the entire mix here.
I can mute different parts of the mix so I can
turn the guitar off or can turn the beats off.
And these are just using audio unit parameters
that are defined on the input busses for the mixer.
And then I can also control the relative
volumes of the 2 inputs that I have going
into the mixer so the guitar, I can make it quieter.
Or I can make the beat quieter.
And that's basically using parameters on the
mixer to provide the mix into a controller.
And then the Start and the Stop
button is just calling AUGraphStart
and Stop in this case and that
stops the entire graph for you.
So that's basically the demo and
then Murray is going to go through.
He'll build on some of the knowledge that we covered in
the previous section and then go through the specific parts
of this app and show you basically
how to build this kind of thing.
So back to slides and back to Murray, thank you.
>> Murray Jason: OK.
So let's take a look at a picture of the app we just saw.
So the first thing to notice here is that we're only using
the output piece of the I/O unit and the second thing
to notice is that instead of taking audio from
a microphone, we're using callback functions.
Those callback functions are attached to the
2 input busses of the multichannel mixer unit.
So to build an app like this you begin in exactly
the same way as you would build the first demo
that we saw, the I/O hosts simultaneous I/O app.
You configure the audio session and in particular get hold
of the hardware sample rate and specify your category.
Specify the audio units that you want
so you can ask the system for them.
Construct your processing graph.
Open it to instantiate everything.
And that lets you obtain references to the
audio units that you want to configure.
From here the story diverges a little bit.
So let's look at that.
In this case, we are actually mixing,
we have 2 different sounds.
So the mixer needs 2 inputs and we need to set that.
You may have noticed that in the drawing that the
beat sound is mono and the guitar sound is stereo.
And that's to add a little interest to the story here.
So we need to set a separate stream
format on each mixer input then we need
to take responsibility for generating the audio.
We do that by way of callback functions and need
to attach those callbacks to the mixer inputs.
To set the mixer bus count to 2, we
use the same call AudioUnitSetProperty
as before this time setting a value of 2 for the property.
Now we need to set the stream formats.
I'm not going to show you the audio
stream basic description setup for this.
It's very similar to what you saw before.
But we suppose that we have a stereo
format and a mono format defined.
We're going to put the guitar sound on bus 0 of
the mixer and apply the stereo format to that bus.
In the same way, we'll apply the-- we're
gonna send the beats sound to bus 1
of the mixer and apply to it the mono stream format.
We also need to ensure that the output
sample rate on the mixer is the same.
That's a step that we also did in the previous app.
There is one more property that's important
to set in this case and not in the other case.
I'll try to explain that.
This property is called MaximumFramesPerSlice.
It's a got a bit of a funny name.
So let's figure out what it means.
Now the term slice in that name is a notion
we use to help understand what's going
on when an audio unit is asked to provide audio.
The system asks for audio in terms of render cycles
and the slice is the set of audio unit sample frames
that is requested of an audio unit
in one of these render cycles.
And a render cycle in turn is an
invocation of an audio units callback.
Closely related to this idea is a hardware
property called I/O buffer duration.
This is available both as a read and
write value through the audio session API
and it has a default value but you can also set it.
And it determines if set the slice size.
If you do want to set it, you make a call like this using
the audio sessions set preferred I/O buffer duration call.
Now there are a few slice sizes
that are very good to know about.
First, the default size, the default
size is the size that is in play
when your application is active and the screen is lit.
And you have not set a specific I/O buffer duration.
The system will ask for 1,024 frames of audio.
That works out to about 0.02 seconds of
sound each time it calls the render callback.
If the screen sleeps, the system knows
that there cannot be any user interaction.
So to save power, it increases the frame count so
it has to call the render callback less frequently.
And it uses a slice size of 4,096.
That's about a tenth of a second.
If you want to perform very low latency I/O, you
can set the frame count as low as about 200 frames
by using the audio session property
that I showed you on the previous slide.
Now that's a lot but there's a little bit more
about this property and that is when you need
to set it and when you don't need to set it.
You never need to set this property on an
I/O unit because I/O units are preconfigured
to handle anything the system might request of them.
All other audio units including mixer
units need this property explicitly set
to handle the screen going dark
if there is not input active.
If you're not using the input side of an I/O unit then
you do need to set the maximum frames per slice property,
if you don't and the screen goes dark, the system will ask
for more samples than the audio unit is prepared to deliver.
An error will be generated and your sound will stop.
So to set it, this is as simple as using the
value of 4,096 again calling AudioUnitSetProperty,
this time using the maximum frames
per slice key on the mixer.
So the audio units are configured and now we need
to connect the sounds to the inputs of the mixer
by attaching the render callback functions.
Now audio unit render callback functions are
normal callbacks, they don't use the block syntax
so they need a context connected
to them and the way we do that is
by using a struct called the AURenderCallback struct.
The struct includes a pointer to your callback
and a pointer to whatever context you want
to give the callback for it to do its work.
Here we set up one for the guitar sound
and then apply it to the guitar bus
of the mixer input by calling AUGraphSetNodeInputCallback.
We do the same thing for the beats sound, put
together a struct that points both to the callback
and to the context it needs, maybe same or different
depending on how you want to write your code
and attach it to the appropriate bus on the mixer.
Now everything's hooked up but I haven't
said anything about the callbacks themselves.
They're one of the most interesting
parts so let's look at them now.
The role of a callback is to generate
or otherwise obtain the audio to play.
In the demo that you saw, they
were simply grabbing some sound.
They simply played some sounds out of a buffer
that took its sounds from some small files on disk.
In your apps you can generate a synthetic
piano, farm animals, whatever you'd like to do.
The callback then conveys that audio to an audio unit.
The system invokes those callbacks as
needed when the output wants more audio.
A key feature of callback functions that you must know from
the start is that they live on a real-time priority thread.
That means all your work is done
in a time-constrained environment.
Whatever happens inside the body of a render
callback must take this into consideration.
You cannot take locks, you cannot allocate memory.
If you miss the deadline for the next invocation you
get a gap in the sound, the trains left the station.
This is what the callback prototype looks like.
It's described in audio unit component services reference.
Let's look at each of its parameters.
The first parameter inRefCon is
the context that you associated
with the callback when you attached it to the bus.
It's whatever context the callback is
going to need to generate its sound.
The second parameter ioActionFlags is
normally empty when your callback is invoked.
However, if you're playing silence for example, if
you have a synthetic guitar and you're between notes,
then you can give a hint to the audio
unit that there's no sound here.
Nothing to process by oaring the value of this
parameter with the output is silenced flag.
Now if you're doing this, you should
also, you must also memset the buffers
in the last parameter the ioData parameter to 0.
Some audio units need real silence
to do their work correctly.
The next parameter inTimeStamp is the
time at which the callback was invoked.
Now it has a field mSampleTime that is a sample counter.
On every invocation, the value of that field increases by
the inNumberFrames parameter that we'll see in a moment.
If you're doing a sequencer or a drum machine
you can use this for scheduling, this time stamp.
BusNumber is simply the bus that called the
callback and each bus can have its own context.
NumberFrames is the number of frames of sample data that
you are being requested to supply to the ioData parameter.
And the ioData parameter is the centerpiece of the callback.
It's what the callback needs to fill when called.
ioData points to an audio buffer list struct,
you can read about that and how it's structured.
We can take a quick look at how you might visualize it.
If your callback is feeding a mono bus on a
mixer then you have a single buffer to fill.
The size of that buffer will be inNumberFrames long and
the first sample will be at inTimeStamp.mSampleTime.
That is-- that will be the frame
number for the first buffer.
If you suppose that you're playing a piano sound and
the user just tapped the piano key then what you'll put
into this buffer is the first .02 seconds
or so of the sound of the piano key.
And the next time it's invoked,
the next .2 seconds and so on.
If you're feeding a stereo bus you have 2 buffers
to fill and you can visualize that like this.
So to create a user interface for this app, we do the
same thing, we use interface builder and use UIKit widgets
and we connect them to the appropriate
parameters in the mixer unit.
In this case, this sample uses the
volume parameter and applies it
to 2 different places, the input scope and the output scope.
The input scope for the input level on the
mixer, the output for the overall master volume.
We're also making use of the enable
parameter to turn each channel on and off.
The rest of the code is as we saw before, you initialize
the graph to set up all the connections and then call start.
So at this point you've seen 2 different
applications, one that took audio from the microphone,
one that took audio that your application generated.
And we've used audio processing graphs but
we haven't really seen what they can do.
So let's look at that now.
First thing I'll talk about it is how audio processing
graphs add thread safety to the audio unit story.
Then we'll look at the architecture
of a dynamic app and by dynamic,
I mean one that the user can reconfigure while sound is
playing and then we'll see the code that makes that work.
So starting with thread safety, audio
units on their own are not thread safe.
While they are processing audio, you cannot do
any of these things, cannot reconfigure them,
cannot play with connections, cannot
attach or remove callbacks.
However, placed in the context of an audio
processing graph, you can specify the changes you want
and then when you call AUGraphUpdate, all pending changes
are implemented in a thread-safe manner and sound continues.
And there is no step 3.
So AU graphs like many of our other APIs
use a sort of a to-do list metaphor.
Now all audio unit graph calls can be called at anytime.
But in typical use, things like connecting callbacks, adding
nodes to a graph and so on, are the ones that you'll do--
the ones that you can do while audio is playing.
And the semantic is that this task is added
to a pending list of things to implement.
Audio continues without interruption.
If you are not playing audio, if
the graph is not initialized
and you call AUGraphInitialize then
all pending tasks are executed.
If audio is playing and you call AUGraphUpdate
then any pending tasks are executed at that time.
So here again is an architectural
diagram of the mixer host sample.
Suppose here that the user is playing audio
and enjoying their guitar and beat sounds,
but they want a little more punch in the
beat so they want to add an equalizer.
The tasks to make that happen are the following.
First you need to break the connection
between the beats and the mixer input.
Then you need to add an EQ unit to the graph,
you need to configure it on both input and output
and then make connections, all the
time without disrupting the audio.
So to do that are these steps,
we'll just go through them quickly.
To disconnect the beats callback
you call AUGraphDisconnectNodeInput.
As I mentioned, that becomes a
pending task not executed yet.
You then use an AudioComponentDescription
struct to specify the iPod EQ unit
and add it to the graph by calling AUGraphAddNode.
Now when a graph is already initialized, when you
call AUGraphAddNode, the node added to the graph,
the action of adding the node to the
graph initializes its audio unit.
So when this step is finished the
iPod EQ unit is initialized
and you can obtain it by calling AUGraphNodeInfo.
Next you're ready to configure and initialize
and if I said initialize I meant instantiate.
So we have an instantiated iPod
EQ unit and a reference to it.
We're now going to configure it and initialize it.
That's a few steps so let's look at those.
Now we need to set stream format but we have a
different scenario here and that is we're starting
with a working application that
already has its stream format set.
So rather than redo that work, we'll use the
AudioUnitGetProperty function call to get the stream format
from the mixer input bus storing that
here in the beatsStreamFormat parameter.
Then apply that format to both the input
and the output of the iPod EQ unit.
Here sending it to the input scope and
here applying it to the output scope.
Now we explicitly initialize the iPod EQ, that's
because this could be an expensive operation.
The iPod EQ is not actually in line yet.
So any work that it has to do can
be done before you do that.
Call AudioUnitInitialize and we've now configured and
initialized the iPod EQ, it's ready to be connected.
You call AUGraphConnectNodeInput to connect
the iPod EQ output to the mixer input
and attach the beats callback using
AUGraphSetNodeInputCallback.
So at this point we have a pending list of these 4 items.
The highlighted ones you see on the screen and you
implement them in one fell swoop by calling AUGraphUpdate.
From the users' perspective, they've tapped the button and
all of a sudden they have EQ available on the beats sound.
So, to wrap up this part of the talk, audio
processing graphs always include exactly 1 audio unit.
That's whether you're performing
input, output or simultaneous I/O.
They add great value to the audio unit
story by adding thread safety and they do
that by using a to-do list metaphor that we went through.
Now for more information on anything I've talked
about or anything else about audio units or audio,
you can please contact Allan Schaffer who is
our Graphics and Game Technologies Evangelist.
Eryk Vershen who is our Media Technologies
Evangelist and take a look
at the iPhone Dev Center for docs and sample code.
In particular, please look at Audio Unit Hosting Guide
for iPhone OS which is a new book that you can link
to from the detailed description of this session.
It's in a preliminary state at the moment, we'll be
flushing it out and please use our developer forums.
In addition to these, also please use bugreport.apple.com.
Tell us where we can do better
in both our APIs and in our docs.
So, in summary, use audio units when you
need real-time high performance audio.
Use I/O units to gain access to hardware, use properties
to configure them and parameters to control them.
And make sure you understand the lifecycle of an
audio unit which includes access, instantiation,
configuration, initialization and then rendering.
Render callbacks let you send your
own audio into an audio unit
and audio processing graphs let you manage
audio units dynamically while sound is playing.
Thank you very much for your attention.